Hey everyone, we're going to be covering
Chronicles Medieval. It's a new game
from a new studio that is very ambitious
and it's got all the great stuff that a
history and an RTS and a strategy nerd
would want wrapped into one. So, let's
get into it. So, as usual, I have
prepared a board here summarizing all
the information that we know thus far
about the game. Just to quickly go over
the chapters here, we have the overview
section where we'll be going over the
game, the studio, the timeline for the
uh endeavor here. Then, we go over the
overall game philosophy, their core
pillars and design principles. We look
at the setting. What does the world map
look like? What do the environments look
like? And then we go deep into what has
been defined for the campaign level of
this. So that means your character, the
factions, politics, and war. And then
finally, we look deep at the battle
gameplay, battlefield itself, the units,
and the levels of battle, which for me
is the most exciting. So feel free to
jump ahead to any of these timestamps
below to look at specifically a review
of each of these sections. If not, let's
take it from the top. All right. So as
an overview of the game, let's talk
super high level. What are we looking at
here? So, here is Chronicles Medieval.
So, it's a sandbox RPG grounded in
medieval world. It covers Western
Europe. They haven't really disclosed
what, but presumably the factions are
going to be England, France, and the
Holy Roman Empire. So, roughly that
scope. It's going to include both a
campaign mode where you can explore,
control, manage settlements and points
of interest. Uh there is a faction and
sort of title system as you work up your
way in the power levels, and you can
engage with others in war and diplomacy.
Then when it comes to battle mode, there
is a both tactical combat and actual
like engage in combat as you'd see in a
like a RPG game. So you can see both of
those layered here. And then some more
important information about this game.
It's built on Unreal Engine as its
backbone. They are really leaning in
heavily into mod support and upon launch
it's going to be coming to PC later
consoles. And what's really exciting for
me is this includes a multiplayer and
co-op mode. So not just in battle but
also I believe in the campaign. So that
altogether as a package is very
exciting. So uh just you know if you
were to bottle this up where does it
land in sort of the landscape of games
right now. So what I've laid out here is
going to be sort of uh different games
based off the scope of how much kind of
part of the world are you looking at and
then on what's the level of management
from like the personal level of an RPG
to the impartial level of like a grand
strategy game. So you know this is the
competitive environment we're in. on one
end of the spectrum is going to be games
like univer uh Europa universalis 5. So
this is huge giant scope where you can
see the entire globe and then the
management is very much about grand
strategy not individual RPG. Uh and on
the other end of the spectrum would be
something that's very small scope like
kingdom come deliverance 2 which
basically is focused on an RPG set in
medieval world but very small scope. So
that's small scope RPG and on the other
end high scope strategy and then in
between you have some that seek to blend
both of those extremes. So one of them
you know popular development was
Manorlords. This one basically is the
same scope as kingdom come deliverance
but instead of giving you control of an
individual character you're more
managing on a strategic level. So that's
the differentiation of the two. The rest
of these titles start to increase in
scope. Uh Mountain Blade 2 the Ban Alert
series is something that's very popular.
It has a larger scope. Again, it's kind
of their own fantasy setting, but it's
historically inspired. So, larger scope,
but it retains some of the RPG elements.
So, they're finding a niche between
strategy and RPG, which has been a
pretty cool soft spot um for people like
me, historians who like the strategy,
but really want to get dug in with the
RPG elements. Then you have something
like the Total War series, which for a
long time has had strategy elements.
They've sort of dipped their toe into
RPG. Mostly the battle is going to be
about controlling units. So, these two
for a long time have sort of been
side by side uh competing with one
another. Total War uh seems to be moving
more uh up here in the spectrum of
strategy. They're trying to have more
layers of depth in Medieval 3, which is
great, but it does leave an opening in
the market. And that seems to be where
Chronicles is positioning itself. So, in
terms of the kind of scope and then
strategy management layer, I think it
lands right about here, which is to say
basically it's not going to be Total War
and it's not going to be Europa
Universalis. the management systems for
your cities and towns and taxations and
all that stuff. It's very much stripped
down. So, they're not going on that
level of strategy and it's leaning more
towards the RPG. And to me, it's
basically a horizontal move from
Mountain Blade from what I can see so
far. Basically, think Mountain Blade,
but they've slightly increased the scope
on both the map and the size of the
units that you can control. So, that's
essentially where they're positioning
it. Another important thing that I
wanted to know as I was doing sort of my
market research here is take a look at
the sort of engines that are behind
these different systems. So, uh, EU5,
Total War, these both use in-house
engines. Same thing with Mountain Blade.
So, these are all in-house engines. And
the reason it seems like Chronicles is
able to kind of jump into the four and
think they have a chance here is because
they're leveraging an existing tool,
Unreal Engine 5. We saw that previously
with Manorlords, you know, a small team,
but that use the power of Unreal Engine
5 to really leapfrog and just, you know,
capture the uh the market by storm. And
that seems to be a play that we'll be
seeing increasingly in these markets is
people leveraging Unreal Engine. And
just because that's a very, you know,
standardized workforce there or workflow
there with a lot of tools. It's easy to
onboard devs. It's easy to bring in mods
and plugins and all these other things
that just make you able to ramp up and
compete much quicker. We've seen a lot
of these other studios struggle under
the accumulated tech debt of their
in-house engines. Total War for a long
time was struggling and it's only just
now with Medival 3 that they've kind of
revamped their in-house engine. But, uh,
Chronicles hitching their, uh, you know,
their vehicle here to Unreal Engine 5 as
the workhorse is smart and it's going to
give them a lot of longevity there. Uh,
so yeah, that's the game. Now, who is
this studio? Uh, so they're called Raw
Power Games. They're pretty new. They
are a Danish game development company
and they keep saying over and over again
in all their kind of information that
hey we're fully funded. So this is a
very ambitious team. I think they
started at like just a couple founders
then to 20 24 people. I think now
they're closer around 200 people. Uh so
they've exploded. So they are you know
they're coming for the uh for the crown
here. Um so basically based in
Copenhagen they actually as part of
their launch they have multiple
different studios. We'll get into that
in a second, but essentially what
they're doing is it seems like they have
a very aggressive move to, as I said
showed here, really position themselves
in the market and try and, you know,
dominate it. And they're doing so by
pulling in a lot of different uh sort of
industry experts. So, they list on their
website here uh different people that
they've hired who've worked on famous
titles. And you can see a lot of people
here who they're looking to compete
with. The Total War series, Crusader
Kings, and then actually a lot of people
that you can see are more on the RPG
side. Total War Three Kingdoms as well.
So yeah, this is a this is a pretty
aggressive play. Uh and then I did some
digging, you know, who is this studio?
How are they coming out of nowhere
trying to make this ambitious play? And
if you dig into it, basically uh it
seems like this is, you know, quite a
bit larger than what was initially uh
just this one game. So it looks like
they're actually um you know, they're
fully funded, so they have some private
funding. I saw that they had this
conference here which was attended by
some members of the Danish government, I
believe. So, it probably seems like
they're courting some sort of local
government trying to get investment in
something to spur development of a
games, you know, environment in uh
Denmark. So, they may have some
government backing here, private
backing, and it seems like they have a
pretty ambitious play. Whoever they're
pitching this idea to, it's quite uh
quite uh ambitious. So, they say that
they have essentially three different
studios here. Raw Power Games, the one
that we're seeing here. So, right now
it's 100 developers, but I think it's
expanded since then. Uh, and then
there's a Raw Power Mobile that's going
to leverage a lot of their work and do
mobile games. And then there's Raw Power
Labs, which here is quite vague
researching and developing technologies
rooted in games, but applicable to a
range of other industries. So, I think
to me this is their like AI play that's
going to be sitting on the back end of
all this that um we'll get into in a
second. But yeah, so very ambitious
here. And then I started digging. Okay,
maybe they're getting their funding from
the government or private funds or
something like that. But who are the
founders? uh you start digging a little
bit and there is this kind of Danish uh
tech article that talks about one of the
founders and he actually has a crypto
past uh and so early on people were very
nervous when there wasn't much revealed
about this game saying is this a scam?
What's going on? There's that that kind
of stink uh attached to kind of the
crypto industry and especially when some
of these early articles said that it was
a studio that was very interested in
generative AI. Um, so this raised some
alarms on my end, but um, in response to
I found that there's a I think it was a
PC Gamer article that kind of recapped
this same article that I read here. It
looks like basically Raw Power Games
responded and I'll read their response
uh, exactly. So they said in response to
this PC gamer article that was maybe
drawing attention to a studio that
really likes AI, here's what they said.
In its first game since uh it was
revealed, Chronicles Medieval is a 100%
handcrafted and was not made with
generative AI except in the sense that
some AI tools are for tasks like testing
or optimization performance. Uh so
that's very interesting that they're
basically soft launching this first one
without the ambitions that they've
clearly stated in a lot of other
documents. They want to lean into AI for
workflows and all that stuff. And I did
more digging. It seems like the AI that
they're mostly interested in is not
necessarily just putting slop out there,
but using AI in innovative ways to make
like in an RPG sense NPCs who can more
uh realistically engage with the world
and the player and have more dynamic
emergent behavior for u the environments
that you you uh are interacting with.
So, there was a little bit of a red flag
there, but as you see, we'll get into
the rest of this game. Uh it's very much
alleviated by the care and attention
they're putting into this title. It's
very much not a slop game. All right.
All right, now we get into the timeline
of the development uh of this game. So,
the studio itself was founded back in
2022. It's been in development for about
4 years. Again, like I said, it started
about 20ish people. And since then, I
think they said by uh the time they
announced in summer 2025, it was about
100 developers on just this game. And
then since then, we've had a year of
about promotion. We're in 2026 now, and
there are probably more people just on
boarding. Uh what it looks like they're
aiming for is going to be an early
access period that they say is going to
last about one year. So probably going
to be starting that in late 2026,
lasting us into 2027. Launch Chronicles
sometime in late 2027 2028. Again, these
dates are subject to slip. Uh and then
finally, there is talk of a sequel
coming out roughly in 2030 and then all
of this culminating in a big new project
in 2035. And again, that's all coming
from some of these early articles and
talks with the founders. So, some of
this information may be out of date
because these articles are dated back to
um let's see here. Yeah, 2022. So, when
they were talking to the founders and
they came up with these plans, that was
at about the time of the founding. Since
then, a lot has changed. Um so, we'll
see kind of what they're thinking, but
clearly they're coming into this venture
with a lot of big ambitions for setting
this up as a stepping stone to dig
another one in the future and really
carve out a space in the in the market
here.
So now let's cover the game philosophy
for Chronicles Medieval. Uh so we're
going to go over core pillars and design
philosophy. Core pillars for the game
are as follows here. A dynamic sandbox,
tactical battles, mod support, and co-op
play. So let's go and look at these uh
each a little more closely. So dynamic
sandbox, this one's pretty
self-explanatory as we've seen with a
lot of these games. Very similar to
Banner Lord. As you go out, uh you can
engage in the world. There's a detailed
map. This is some concept art that they
have um or some early prototyping that
shows the different factions here. So,
settlement, you can explore the campaign
map. It reveals itself. There's
different points of interest. There's
players and agents that then move around
in this map. And to quote them, they
want the world built in uh with
overlocking systems that you can engage
with. So, they want stuff to propagate
out in the same way that it could in
like a Total War game where a faction
emerges and one playthrough gets very
powerful, it wages war, and it conquers
others. Next playthrough, maybe that
faction doesn't fair as well. So very
dynamic sandbox. Uh to show that they
actually in one of their uh development
diaries showed some of this like uh
trade network system that they have that
will kind of link the economies of
different settlements. Caravans go
between them and the way you could
interact with them for instance would be
raiding a caravan which could hurt the
economy of a faction or settlement. So
that's sort of the dynamic sandbox.
Tactical battles is the one I'm most
interested in that they seem to be
showing a lot more of when it comes to
the marketing. Uh but yeah, let's get
into tactical battles. So they say here
basically they want uh the composition
of your army and how you deploy it to
matter. AI needs to be uh capable of
fighting meaningful battles. Uh but key
to the differentiation from total war is
the player actually plays an important
role in the combat itself fighting in
third person alongside the units. Uh
here uh what we'll get into later is
basically as you're leading the troops
from the front as you can see here. Uh
you have this early stage deployment
where you can position your troops in
battle. You still act as a commander,
you can give orders, tell a unit to
move, to flank, to hold ground, things
like that. And then finally, you can
actually engage Allah Mountain Blade
here in close quarters combat. Uh then
we get into mod support. So here they
say basically, hey, we want to make mods
a big part of what we're doing. uh
they've been working closely with group
of experienced modders from the
beginning. Modding tools will be
available from day one and expect this
to be uh or sorry will not be available
from day one but at full release that's
when they expect to roll out with a lot
of this mods tools. Uh but they may do
some testing in the early access period.
And again this is really great to hear.
Uh the reason we don't see this with a
lot of other games is because they're
using their in-house uh software and
workflows versus the fact like we
covered back here, the fact that this
game is going to be leveraging Unreal
Engine 5, which is very much easy for
people to onboard. That means that it's
much easier to get mod support. And as
we know with these titles, bringing in
communities when it comes to mods
greatly increases the longevity of your
game because the players get invested in
it. They can fix a lot of issues and
they can add longevity to the game with
all sorts of spin-off mods like total
like trying to bring I don't know um
Game of Thrones mods or overhauls or all
sorts of stuff. So that strategic play
to base yourself on Unreal Engine not
only lets you get into the market easily
and yourself develop but expands out
what you can do with mods. So that being
a core pillar, I mean this is like I
keep saying very aggressive from the
studio but it's very much leaning into
the community. This is something that
players would want. Uh, and then the
last pillar here is going to be co-op
play. So, this to me was very exciting.
You know, all of the above was
interesting. We've but we've seen this
before. Maybe they can do it better, but
introducing co-op to me is very
exciting. So, they say, uh, we will have
a, uh, let's say in early access, we
will have a single player campaign mode
and co-op custom battles for up to four
friends to play together. At 1.0 release
though, they are going to introduce
co-op campaign play, allowing players to
invite their friends to play together.
That's been awesome. if they can get it
stabilized and working well without the
lag or drop issues or desync issues,
that's a fantastic experience. Um, one
caveat to all this is, oh, you know, I
could be excited for like a robust uh
matchmaking system, but no, they're
putting uh water on that idea. So, they
said, being said, we want to be clear
that dedicated servers with matchmaking,
server browsers, and large PVP battles
are not our focus for Chronicles
Medieval. It doesn't mean players can't
host their own servers, but it's just
not going to be service primarily on
their platform. Maybe they'll change
their minds in the future, but that is a
major caveat here. All right, so that's
going to be your core uh design pillars.
Now, let's get into the design
principles. So, you can see them listed
here. Let's go into each one uh in
order. So, Wheel of Time basically say
that hey, they want you to get a sense
that this is a live living breathing
world and that time inexurably moves
forward. You want to feel that when you
play. So that means characters age and
die from beggars to kings. One
generation builds upon the next.
Resources are finite. So instead of it
being in a, you know, stasis mode where
you're playing and engaging, but nothing
really have has consequences. No, they
want time to be in here and for that to
be an important factor. So great, cool
to see that. Maybe that plays out when
it comes to actually seasons, time of
day being important, things like that.
We'll see how this kind of design uh
principle plays out. Next, information
is power. So here they're saying that
they want you to feel like you are kind
of grounded in the past, limited in
terms of information. So as you explore
the map, for instance, there's going to
be a fog of war. Not everything is
revealed. Even if you do go and visit
England uh and then you leave, your fog
of war still remains and you might get a
locked uh static view that when you
revisit it later, then it can get
updated. But they want there to be this
lag and this kind of asymmetry in terms
of information. So I like that. I like
when games make sure that you are not uh
you know God in the sky who can see
everything in real time. So I really
like that it grounds you in the setting
where you have to deal with this real uh
realistic fog of war. Sidetracking
through opportunities. Basically this is
them just teeing into their sandbox
experience. They want to see the world
with lots of little interesting things
that you can do. Side quests things that
you want to engage with. There is no
central campaign driving you to do
something. Instead they want to kind of
see the world with all these little
interesting things that you can have. I
then plucked out this other statement
that someone said where basically they
said, "Hey, we decided to add enigmatic
layers to the settlement which hopefully
can intrigue the players and motivate
them to explore the world." And again,
sorry for the typos here, but as I typed
it, um, it seemed like essentially when
you go down into the individual
settlements, there might be a quest
giver or some like notice board or
things you can interact with that try
and guide and steer players towards
little sandbox and sidetrack things, but
you're not um handheld or forced to
engage with them.
Uh moving on, historical believability.
This seems to be the biggest pillar that
I'm seeing. So they said that on the one
hand, this is not a simulation, but on
the other hand, uh they do very much
want to ground the philosophy and the
thinking and some of the limitations in
real history. So they're doing that with
a historian that they've hired. They
have in-house HEA practitioners. Um and
yeah, there's all of that. And you can
see it play out when it comes to uh the
environments that they've created. One
of the things that I have them quoted as
saying is that, you know, the medieval
world in movies is typically drab. In
reality, it was very colorful. So, they
want to bring that to life. Uh they've
done lots of f research on uh nuances of
like fashion, how is armor forged, how
do people hem their garments, um what
are combat methods, etc. Uh using
reenactment. And then specifically when
it comes to reenactment for combat, they
said uh while realism is important, we
are not making simulation. that means we
have the freedom to design artificial
systems to make it even better. So that
was an interesting thing to note. Uh but
there was an extended talk in one of
their YouTube videos where they were
going over the senior combat designer
and one of their kind of hea experts to
go over sort of their process. So again
like they were indicating grounding it
in historical realism but then maybe
dialing it up and being a little bit
more creative if they can to add some
flourish and make it fun for the player.
So yeah, the historical believability is
something that I think will be carried
over in these later sections that we
talk about, but yeah, it's one of their
core design principles. Uh, dynamic
environment is another one. Basically,
this one just ties into the idea that,
hey, it's a sandbox world. And here I
have a quote. They said very early on,
we decided to make all the systems that
make up the gameplay and the
decision-making systems to be part of
one whole framework. This helps with
performance and dynamic gameplay. So,
it's hard to see what this means in
principle, but for me, it basically ties
back to essentially like what you'd see
for a Total War campaigns or something
from, you know, one of the Banalord
games, which is you have this big game,
different factions, but there's no
overarching campaign. The AI just kind
of does its thing, and each different
playthrough plays out differently,
either on its own or because of player
influence. Uh, so yeah, that's basically
it overall. And then here we have some
coverage of the setting. We'll get into
then uh how you interact with that
setting when it comes to campaign and
battles, but for now, let's look at just
the setting itself.
So, there has been no overall map
revealed for the game. They did hint
that it starts around probably 1313
before the start of the 100red years war
and that it covers quote a big part of
medieval Europe. We don't know what that
means, but they have mentioned that
there are kind of three factions so far
at release. It's going to be uh England,
France, and the Holy Roman Empire. So to
me that probably means the scope of the
game is going to be this red square that
I've highlighted here. Now in their dev
diaries I was able to extract out some
images that you can see that starts to
yes clearly show that we are looking at
those areas and sort of what that might
that map might start to look at. So
looking down here you can start to see
sort of the level of settlement detail
that they're thinking about and it's
pretty dense and to me heavily it looks
heavily inspired by sort of the scale of
things we would see from like Mountain
Blade 2. Um but yeah, I like it. And
then they have this other one here which
is more concepted version of it where
you take the settlement uh level of
density and then you add on additional
points of interest mercenary camps,
desertters camp, bandit camp, things you
can engage with uh taverns where there
may be quests and stuff like that. Um so
that's looking very good. But again,
stepping back in terms of the
environment, we're seeing that this is a
lot closer to banner lords. And from
what I can see here, it doesn't seem
like it's going down the total war route
where you really have more about
building the infrastructure of your
different provinces. It's more about
ownership, more about dealing with
characters, engaging with points of
interest than it is with actually going
hardcore and the management. There will
be some of it, but probably not that
much. Uh, and then more on their blog,
they had an early teaser that showed,
hey, did we just reveal more of a map
you'll explore in game? Yes, we did.
That got me intrigued, but a little bit
of digging showed that this map was
actually just England turned on its side
and was based on this old uh go map. So,
it was cool to see that they're
incorporating this. I was wondering if
they were going to make the whole
campaign stylized, but uh no. It seems
like from what we've seen in these other
kind of map views that this is just kind
of maybe something you might get from
some cinematics or other stuff, but when
it comes to actually navigating the
campaign map, it looks more realistic
like this. Uh, and then in terms of the
settlements, they showed some early
development on what the levels look
like, you know, villages and hamlets all
the way up to towns and later capital
cities. Uh, in terms of the
environments, uh, you can go down and
interact with all these environments.
So, they did have an earlier quote that
I pulled here that basically says you
can freely roam and go wherever you
want. You can enter settlements, visit
castles, attack caravans, chase bandits,
perform quests, and you can even hire
companions. So, all of that means that
at some points in time, you're going to
kind of dip down into the world. I bet
you can't do it just anywhere. You know,
you can't just say, "Hey, I want to just
open the world and roam in real time."
It's probably going to be tied to
different points of interest in the same
way that you might with Bannerlord. And
then once you're there, again, you can
see these environments that look
beautiful, powered by Unreal Engine,
highfidelity stuff. Hopefully, it runs
well if they use a lot of the kind of
newer tools that Unreal Engine is is uh
bringing forth. But yeah, you can see
very very beautiful, not just the
landscapes, the urban environments as
well that you can see here. I wonder if
there are going to be uh some
handcrafted or if a lot of it is going
to be procedural. That is uh something
we're going to have to see. And then
later there were some little snippets
that they did show that indicates that
we'll be able to get up on the castle
walls, the battlements, and presumably
for me that teases at the sieges, which
we've seen a little bit of in the
trailers, but thus far have not actually
seen kind of showcased.
All right, now let's get into the actual
campaign. What does gameplay on this
level look like? So to start off, you
have your character. So they say that
the character here will start from the
bottom of the medieval social ladder and
start to work their way up. Uh they
teased a little bit about what this
character creator uh system would look
like. Uh they didn't show much but
basically hey you start a new game start
starts around 1313 Gathering Storm again
before the Hundred Years War. You start
that game you say do you want to create
your character or do you want to just do
quick play which would be probably
diving into a battle. And then after
here they showed a faction selector. Do
you want to be England or do you want to
choose France or the Holy R Roman
Empire? Those are the three factions so
far. Uh, and then, you know, you can see
this is step one of 17. They didn't show
what the rest are, but presumably it'd
be similar to other of these kind of RPG
games where you can tailor what does
your character look like, what is their
sort of starting kit and armor, some
skill points and skill tree stuff,
probably some simple stuff like maybe
basic heraldry and whatnot. So, yeah,
very cool. Uh, I like that. Uh, and then
there was a big question about, okay,
who are you interacting or interacting
with in the world? So factions for this
[clears throat] one they said that
they're moving away from the more
classical concept of factions. So
instead of England being a block, France
being a block, Holy Roman Empire being a
block. Again, that's not historically
accurate. It's more about these
different smaller entities decentralized
uh governance and authority. And that's
what they're picking up on with the
design philosophy and implementation
here. And the way they're doing it is
with this concept of titles. So this is
to me very exciting. So they basically
say that there's these different titles
that are split up into different types.
The different types are going to be
feudal nobility, clergy, merchants,
artisans, and mercenary bands. Within
each of these, there's going to be a uh
hierarchy of levels that you can
progress through and have dependencies
between. They did say that at early
access, you're just going to be locked
into the feudal nobility, the more
standard cookie cutter one we'd expect.
But I'm very interested to see what it
would look like to progress up these
different ones because obviously a lot
of this game hinges on battles. So, what
does it mean to kind of progress up the
level of artisanry? Are you going to be
a famous artist who actually goes into
battle? Uh, to me, it probably seems
like a lot of these are going to be
overlapping features where yes, you can
have a character who maybe is an artist,
but they're still a fighter. So, I think
all of these um may be overlapping or
sure titles and you can dip in between
the the various ones. Uh, but we'll see.
Uh, to me, it's very exciting. Uh, and
they said when it comes to naming these
different titles, they say they are
going to be historically plausible, but
concessions have to be made. So, they're
going to have to make some up a little
bit. Grounding is always historical, but
they're going to draw from a broader
time range to get ideas and maybe stuff
that's closer to legend in terms of what
you might expect. So, that's pretty
cool. Uh, and then, you know, what do we
make of these different titles? Well,
here they say, you know, that here's,
for instance, the uh the hierarchies
when it comes to like feudal nobility.
So here's the different levels of the
feudal nobility. And here is their
concept art of it. So the way they see
this playing out, it looks like you'd
have the kingdom, the duche, and the
county. So each of these these different
levels that you could progress up, and
there would probably be levels beneath
these where it's like simple knights uh
who don't have their own counties that
they govern, but could answer to a leech
lord. So you could see the different
levels, and then they kind of connect to
each other through this branching system
of dependencies. Um, another cool thing
that I really like is the fact that
there are these different titles, and
we'll get into the descriptions, but
there are these titles that are um, they
have varying levels of legitimacy. So,
there's a cool toggle here that speaks
to that. So, you could see what are the
titles uh, either de facto or dour. So,
de facto means by fact. So, who who
actually controls this county in the
real campaign map versus by law who
maybe is a hereditary person who should
own it but has been kicked out. So, I
like that concept of actually toggling
between these states. That's very
interesting to me. Now, a little bit
more meat on the bone. So, they say each
title is visually represented by
heraldry. Uh, you know, their banners,
their code of arms that are represented
not only in settlements but also in your
armies. I love that the level of
personalization that carries through
you. So you get a sense of the
progression and your individuality.
That's great. Uh and then how do you get
these titles? Well, it says some titles
are linked to settlements or regions of
the game. So holding a title grants a
character ownership over villages,
castles, cities, regions, and so on. Uh
doing that gets you income through
taxation and other revenues that you get
as duties from the vassels of the lands
or through trade. So again, you're
seeing some level of management, but
it's very uh it's not as deep as
something as like Total War or certainly
not as deep as the economic systems that
you'd see in one of the paradox titles.
Uh so that's very cool. Uh and then they
say for these titles, titles can have
someone above you, your lege, and they
can have someone below you, your
vassels. And in some cases, you can have
one both or neither. Uh and these will
vary. And then a single faction, they
say, can encompass the full range of
nobility from the lowliest knight to the
most renowned emperor. So a faction to
them is kind of the same way here. You
might have someone at the top of the
chain. And this is the faction. It's
dynamic. It's not the Holy Roman Empire.
It's basically the faction of this
particular duke and their or sorry of
this particular king and their family
and the network that they've put beneath
them. It's not just some arbitrary Holy
Roman Empire or France. No, really, it's
about the dynasty, which to me is great
because that's more much more
historically accurate. Uh and then some
more context around this. So they do say
that uh for these titles you can't just
kind of conquer everything under one
banner. Uh they have some limits on
this. So the way they explained it is
basically there are two limits. There's
a vassel limit and a domain limit. Both
of both of them being sort of soft caps
instead of hard caps. So the first is a
domain limit. Basically if you try and
directly control one city that's fine.
Two cities okay. Three cities you start
to stretch it. And the more and more you
go the more land you claim the harder it
is for you simply to manage. But then
also in this sort of medieval society it
means that you're usering a lot of power
instead of sharing it with your vassels
and they may resent you for that. So
there is a natural domain limit couched
in historical and human psychology that
I liked. So you can expand personally
but at a certain point you get
limitations of logistics and sort of
psychology and diplomacy that kick in
and you start to get some penalties
there. Same thing goes with vassels.
Okay, maybe you get limitations of how
far you can expand. Then you start
collecting more and more vassels. But
clearly, you know, the more vassels you
get, there can be too many where you
can't manage them or they start
squabbling with each other and you start
to get penalties. So they talk they talk
about that you'll suffer penalties with
the standing uh of your vassels or you
might have penalties to your income. So
I like that idea. The fact that there
are limitations to the system, the fact
that they're soft and the fact that
they're historically grounded to me is
just great way to go about this. and it
seems very natural and you have this
fluid emergence of factions and very
complex uh diplomacy and then some more
meat on the mods here when it comes to
uh these titles and this idea of
legitimacy. So what they say here is
basically in order to claim something
you basically have to go in and hold it
that's specific to these kind of uh
territories. Um so when a character
meets a particular set of requirements
so again typically that means claiming
something physically but you know if
you're an artisan it might be different.
Uh so holding points of interest is how
you do that. you can then claim that
title and then once you have it claimed,
how legitimate is your claim? If you're
a foreign invader, low legitimacy as
opposed to someone who's been there for
a long time. Uh, and if you have high
legitimacy, it means you'll be able to
hold on to that land and manage it well
versus if you're a new foreigner, you'll
have a lot of penalties and kind of uh,
crosswinds working against you. Uh, and
like I said earlier, you can have claims
to things that you don't currently hold.
If you were the longtime legitimate
ruler of London, an invasion kicked you
out. You may still have a claim to that
land even if you are not currently a
possessor. I like that idea. Uh and then
they say, you know, all this legitimacy
and stuff plays in very importantly when
it comes to being a lord. How do you
dole out control of different regions to
different people based off while you
probably want to give it to legitimate
heirs? How do you court that? Do you
give gifts? How do you manage your
relationships? It's all really cool
crunchy historically based stuff. Um and
then legitimacy here is based off how
long a character has held a title and
how complete their ownership of the
linked areas in the world was. So very
cool interesting mechanic. All right. So
that's how you get sort of the emergence
of these factions, how they interact
with each other. And then finally there
is the politics and war angle of it. So
they say um starting with sort of
politics on the diplomatic side, it's
character to character. Relationships
between characters matter the most.
Again it's measured from negative 100 to
100. Absolute hate to absolute love. You
can be swayed with each other based off
personalities. So they say here brave
character for instance will tend to
despise a cowardly one. So based off
traits or on specific actions that you
want to take. They say sharing gifts um
if you fought someone or if you made a
deal. So very dynamic there. Uh and then
they say here when it comes into
diplomacy basically all this stuff that
you've worked on your relationships your
vassels your allies that all plays into
the war making mechanics. So here is
going to be the display. So you declare
war uh in this case. So you can see in
this case it was an overlord who
declared the war and they can try and
call up to war both their vassels and
their allies. And an interesting thing
that they talked about is that those
don't immediately get pulled into a
fight. Vassels for instance are expected
to join their legions war but are not
always immediately compelled to do so.
So that'll depend on how you know
well-liked you are by your vassels. The
better you manage that relationship, the
more they'll answer this call to arms
versus if you are very shaky or illegit
illegitimate leader or maybe a not a
powerful one. Then you just won't have
many people who call up and answer that.
Now, that'll have some penalties down
the road if you don't answer your lord
because they might try and rebuke you or
not give you titles in the future. So,
it's a it's a given pull there. Uh
again, very realistic to to history. Uh
furthermore, for allies, it functions a
little bit differently in the sense that
allies are people who have struck a deal
to yes, let's stand by each side and
help each other out. For mutual
protection, um to attain this level of
arrangement between two different
groups, uh it says it uh they need to be
comparable uh in terms of strength and
there's all sorts of other criteria it
seems like, but essentially even allies
who are supposed to come to war aren't
necessarily going to be forced to do it.
So, I like this idea that everything in
the world is kind of a soft cap where it
doesn't have to go one way or another.
Nothing is binary. It's all based off
kind of this dynamic melding of the
system. It's unpredictable, but it's
still somewhat based in the influence
that you've had and how much investment
you've made on your relationships, which
to me makes for much more engaging
gameplay where stuff is emergent. It's
uh, you know, unclear what's going to
happen and it's much more realistic. Uh
finally, when it comes to waging war
itself, they say once you declare war,
you can take all sorts of actions with
your vassels and your allies taking the
field. Uh here they say basically you
can, as you'd expect, occupy cities and
castles. You can raid their trade and
try and kind of hit at their resources.
Uh as you do that, there's going to be
this overall war score that gets counted
to see, well, who's winning the
engagement, who's racking up the most
points in this war, and then you can use
that war score to then force
negotiations uh in the peacemaking
stage. So when it comes to peace,
essentially what they describe is you
can try and open up peace talks at any
point in time early in the war, late in
the war, whenever you then come to that
peace talk with your war score. And if
the war score is pretty close or even
just small, it's unlikely that you are
going to be able to get away with much.
You can set you can maybe get a piece
where both sides decide to deescalate,
but no one's going to demand anything
out of each other. Versus if you try and
extract something out of your opponent,
um you need a higher war score to demand
that. And a cool feature that I liked is
that um they said if you pass a certain
threshold, it doesn't matter what your
opponent thinks, they can't reject it.
You can force the war to end. And I like
that idea. Um
uh yeah, so you can force a war to end
if you are dominating it enough and you
can extract certain concessions from
them. Um so initially those concessions
are going to be mostly about who holds
what cities and castles, but in the
future they want to expand what that
means. So, independence, trade, and more
uh outside of just land and coin.
Another thing that they said is that,
you know, in order to prevent players
from abusing this mechanic or
steamrolling is that once you win a war,
you are forced to have a a truce.
So, as a truce, you separate for how
many years after to allow it to cool
off, both sides can rebuild their
strength. Uh you can break a truce, but
if you do so routinely or even maybe
just once, you get a pretty harsh
penalty when it comes to diplomacy. So,
I really really like this. Again, you
get these realistic limitations to what
you can do. Uh, but it's often soft
capped, which says you can do it, but
the system realistically is going to
penalize you. So, again, that's that's
sort of how you interact with the
campaign there. Now, there may be
additional layers in the campaign when
it comes to managing your settlements.
We have not seen that yet. They are
earmarking that for future
conversations, but yeah, that's what
we've seen so far. But I I think again,
looking forward, it'll probably be more
similar to Banner Lord than it is to
something like Total War.
All right, now we get into the juiciest
stuff, which is going to be battle
gameplay itself. This has me most
excited. So, battle gameplay. We're
going to cover the battlefield, the
units, and the levels of battle. So, the
battlefield itself is um yes, they say
here procedurally generated. They were
showing off a cool tool that was um
allowing the developers to quickly spin
out some stuff really easily. Um it
seems like it is based off where you are
in the world. So, if you're in upland
regions, it'll be more hilly. the
mountains will be more mountainous, more
forest if you're in the forest. Same
thing goes with the river. That being
said, the system does seem to have in
mind that um basically it needs to have
a certain amount of open space to allow
battles to take place. They don't want
randomly generated content to just be
poor gameplay. So, there's some limits
here, but um yeah, it's pretty robust.
Uh they talk at length about their
system, and they said like all our
tools, Yamir, which is the name of this
kind of uh generative system, won't be
staying locked away in our studio
either. were committed to putting in the
hands of the modern community and they
are excited to see what people might
build where you can build very specific
battles from campaigns like if you want
to build or azen core or other famous
battles maybe even famous siees cool
have at it you can do that uh and maybe
they'll even have a way where they can
bring community content into the main
game uh so yeah that's the battlefield
itself and again you can see the virtues
of being an Unreal Engine means it's
very very beautiful and realistic
uh the units itself they go into this a
bit. Uh I do have a screen cap here. So,
first things to talk about is well, how
big are these units? So, they say that
basically units are going to be about,
you know, this strength here. It can get
down to maybe just a handful of
companions, maybe a dozen folks, all the
way down into the largest unit size I've
seen is about 100. Take that all
together, and they are aiming to have
battles go up to about a,000 versus
a,000. So, 2,000 total cap, maybe a
little more if they can push it, but
they say already this is kind of
straining the uh the bounds of
performance, but they'd like to go
larger if they can. So maybe they'll get
there. But to me, this is looking great.
This is on the level of something like
Banner Lord, if not maybe a little bit
higher in terms of the scope of it. Um,
so yeah, that's basically that. The
different units themselves are going to
be varied. It's essentially what you'd
expect with the different sort of
faction blocks having their own specific
unit types. So they'll have they'll have
generic stuff like, you know, your
men-at-arms, your militia folks,
crossbowmen, pikemen, the assortment
stuff, but there's going to be a focus.
So for instance, French, of course,
heavy cavalry, Englishmen with your long
bowman, and then the HRE with heavy
infantry. And within each unit, another
cool thing to note is they're using a
lot of the kind of tools in Unreal
Engine to have each soldier be unique.
And it's kind of little combinations and
permutations of little parts of the kit
that'll vary to make um the units look
dynamic and realistic. And yeah, that's
yeah, just allows you to zoom in and be
very engaged. All right, once you're in
the battles, how does it play out? So,
they have this concept of levels of
battle that I really appreciate. So,
this to me as a history nerd is probably
the most exciting one because it best
mimics, I think out of any title I've
seen so far, best mimics the way battles
uh were probably fought. So, the first
level is battle planning. So, this is
where you deploy your units. So, you
deploy the unit formations. As you can
see here, not just where are they
placed, but in terms of formation, what
stance are they adopting? Are they going
to be in a specific one like wedge,
which is obviously going to be better at
piercing battle lines? Are they going to
be in a shield wall, which is better at
holding? Are they going to be loose,
which is better for kind of uh reducing
incoming fire damage? Stuff like that.
So, you will first deploy your units
within a big box, which is kind of like
total war, your uh deployment zone. Then
you then you set your standing orders,
which is essentially the unit behavior.
And it's essentially a toggle where as
these units are playing around and
fighting, do you want them to be
aggressive? Do you want to be defensive?
or do you want them to kind of be more
dynamic and hop between the two and try
and take matters a bit more into their
own hand and determine whether or not
they should be aggressive or defensive?
That's really cool. Uh and then finally,
what you do at this opening stage is you
give your initial orders. This is all
preset before battle begins, which is
like, okay, here's the enemy. I can see
them on the horizon. Okay, cavalry, you
know, use these way points to get around
that flank. And okay, once the battle
starts, they will go and do the orders
that you commanded them. Those are your
initial orders. And then once they get
to that final point, they're then going
to follow the standing orders that you
gave them previously. You can adjust
those standing orders over time. But if
you don't engage anymore, they're going
to go ahead and just do what you you
told them to do. So the way this would
work, for instance, is let's say that
you wanted your cavalry to threaten a
flank. You could say, "Go over here."
And then your standing order could be
aggressive, which is go around the back,
attack whatever. Alternatively, let's
say you wanted to claim a hill with some
archers and some spearmen in a box. You
can give an initial order to go there,
but then be defensive, which means
they're going to hold that ground. So,
you could see how this plays out where
you can set your initial moves. Hold the
right, you know, hold this flank, go and
attack through the back and then the
battle gets underway and you don't
really have to manage that because your
orders are happening. Um, that to me is
very realistic to the way medieval
battles are fought. Uh, and then the
next stage is command mode. Battle is
underway. The troops are falling. their
orders. Now, you still get to give uh
commands to your troops. So, what you do
is you go into command mode. It's a
third person view where it the the
camera will pedestal up so you get a
better view of the battlefield, but
again, still limited, not seeing
everything. Uh, which I like. I like
those limitations. And then time slows
down as you're doing this. So, this idea
that you're not pausing, but at least
you get a little bit of time to breathe
and think. So, I like that idea that
time is ever moving forward. And that
was one of their design uh principles.
Uh, and then when you're giving
commands, there are different things you
can do. There's global commands and then
there's local commands. Global commands
are things like, "Hey everyone, attack
or hey everyone, retreat or you know,
some very general stuff." And the thing
I really liked about this is they said
that these global commands are issued by
uh, you know, Saxon sounds or trumpets
or stuff that could be heard universally
across a battlefield, which again is
very historical. You can't micromanage
all of your troops um, realistically.
you're using, you know, general symbols
and trumpeting that is supposed to be to
your local commanders what you're
supposed to do on a general sense. So, I
like that idea of global commands. Then
you could have uh local commands. So, in
this one, basically, you are going to
have to ride up to the unit that you
want. And then they're showing here that
there's this little cursor that allows
you to select said unit and then give
them particular orders that are more
specific instead of these general
commands. Things like attack, defend,
reposition, you know, things of that
nature. I really like that. And then
finally, you know, you could stay in
this command mode all you wanted. Stay
in the back lines, manage things, really
be this strategic uh commander. But if
you want to, you could actually go and
launch yourself into combat mode where
you fight in the battle. Uh in doing so,
it'll be like Mountain Blade where you
can kill foes or even distract them,
which can be important. And your actions
on the battlefield actually can sort of
turn the tide of battle. Not just in
terms of the commands you can give, but
actually you being present as the lord,
taking part in the fighting, you know,
risking your own life can impact the
local morale of your troops. If you help
wait into the fight on foot, holding the
front with the shield wall, they're
going to hold for much longer and the
enemy seeing this will probably take a
morale penalty. So, I like this that
it's um yeah, just saying that yes,
you're vulnerable as a lord, but you get
rewarded for getting caught in the thick
of it. So, I like this. the levels of
all this to me speaks of realism and
seems like very engaging gameplay that I
think bridges a little bit of the lack
of this middle ground that I was missing
from uh things like banner lords where
yes you can give commands but it's not
as nuanced as what they have here with
the different formations or standing
orders or initial orders and all that
behavior to me gives it a little bit
more of that strategy that I was missing
from banner llords. Uh, okay. So, you do
these battles, troops fight. How do you
win the battle? So, they say here that
at the end of the day, morale is the
heart of the fight. It's not about
killing everyone. Although, yes, killing
does impact morale. You know, they say
here when it comes to morale, taking
casualties will hurt your morale. Being
charged, especially in the flank, drags
down morale. Watching friendly units
break drags down morale. And especially
the biggest one is if you as the leader
go down fighting, that dings morale. So
yes, morale is going to be the primary
decider of what happens to your units
and who's winning the fight. Uh to track
morale, they have different states. You
start off inspired, which is kind of
higher than usual. Then confident, which
is basically the normal stance.
Concerned, which is a warning light, and
then wavering, which means, hey,
something bad is going to happen here
shortly. And then finally, uh if nothing
happens and things keep getting worse
and worse, then it's going to be broken,
which triggers the unit to route and run
away. And they say when a unit turns and
flees, it is counted as lost regardless
of how many men actually survive that
battle. So they're just going to melt
away. You don't get them in the post
battle action. If they are allowed to
break in this way, they're gone. They're
main desertters.
Uh and then they talk a bit more about
that. So let's say that a battle is
going on and on and you actually have a
little bit more control on how the
battle ends up. It's not a fight to the
end where someone just has everything
route and the entire army army vanishes
if you're on the losing side. No, it's a
little bit more dynamic than that, which
I really like. So, they discriminate
between this idea of routing and
retreating. So, on the routing side,
this is when uh a unit breaks because
you let the morale just deteriorate
completely. Uh if that happens, the unit
is lost. They said currently it will not
be possible to reform mid battle like
you might see in Total War. But when
they say currently, that means they're
probably considering ways to rally your
troops and extend the fight. But for
now, if a unit is allowed to break, it's
going to run off the battlefield. But
let's say you know you're in a losing
fight and you don't want your entire
army to just okay it's over. We're just
going to fight till I everything
vaporizes and on the campaign level
you're left with nothing. No, you can
identify that the battle is going poorly
and still try and leave with a more
controlled retreat where you end up on
the campaign map with more uh to
continue fighting with on another day.
So they call this retreat mode. So
retreating units stay with your army and
can fight another day. And this is where
you deliberately give an order to pull
back and uh change it up. And then
finally here they say whether you decide
to route or retreat, you know, the
battle is over. Um one side clearly
holds the terrain. So at that point they
say you're going to be presented with a
screen that says, you know, defeat or
victory. But this is the cool thing that
I really like. They say the battle
doesn't end there. You can actually keep
fighting which Total War people will
know and love. Uh so one of the things
you can do when you know you've defeated
uh an enemy, you can actually decide to
say continue. I'm going to be merciless.
I'm going to personally help run down
all the troops and, you know, just make
sure that they all completely broken.
Um, and yeah, just make sure they're
wiped off the face of the earth. The
other thing that I really like that you
could do is maybe the battle says you've
been declared as defeated, but your
units are still kind of retreating,
march away, marching away in good order,
but are being pursued by the enemy. And
if you don't do anything, they're going
to shatter and be run down. What you can
actually do is you can take part in the
withdrawal and maybe even perform some
holding action, distract the enemy,
allow your precious few troops to escape
and be very heroic in that last stand.
So to me, you know, that's the type of
thinking from a game development
standpoint that means they truly
understand what players want. To me, you
know, this is the most fun parts of the
battles when you can actually be the
heroes, when you're saving the troops
that you've been attached to, or when
you want to be a victorious general and
you want to kind of do the killing blow
and wipe your enemies from the field and
see them driven before you. Um, yeah,
that just cements to me the the proper
mindset that the game developers have.
Um, so yeah, that's basically it. I
think we've covered essentially
everything that's been revealed for the
game so far. More to come soon. I'm
probably going to have my own deep dive
on the battle mechanics because there's
a lot more levels of depth and crunch to
get into. So, check out that video where
we'll be getting into more details about
the battles themselves. But otherwise,
that's it for my overview of the game. I
could not be more excited doing this
research myself. And yeah, check it out.
See you.